There's a guy called Mike Parker Pearson. He's the
prof of archaeology in charge of the big dig that's going on up in the
Priscelles at the moment, and that will be this summer.
The archaeological dig is to pick out exactly where these stones came from
and how they were utilised. Talking to Mike, I mean he's a
Hecumenalist guy, he's a friendly sort of guy, he feels that they were
of a religious nature, but not religion as we would understand it now,
but of a more sort of animist kind of thing. People obviously felt that the stones were
in some ways magic, they were very important, and people would venerate the stones, but they
would venerate the effort that was needed to make them into a circle. So they think that the
circles were important because they were aligned upon the solstice, the winter and summer solstice,
of the year, so that they were aligned, specially aligned, so that they could calculate. Well,
one argument is they would calculate the alignment so that they knew which time of year to plant crops
and which time of year to have their festivals. So there's a lot of information attached to that,
which again, there's a lot of interpretation because nobody knows for certain because these
guys didn't read and write, so there's no written record, and it's really the edge of history
up there. But those stones were obviously very important, they were important enough
that people would transport them probably a month's journey eastwards to go to Stonehenge.
Why on earth would they do that? Because they must have had thousands of people moving them,
and why they did it, we don't know. We think it's religion, we think it's to do with the
celebration of communal effort. I have one here, that's a prusselli bluestone, it's a chip,
it's not, it's not, the big one's very, very about three tons. But if you look at this very carefully,
I don't know if you can see it very well in here, but it's got little crystalline structures in the
rock. If you polish this rock like this, right, that is the sky, that's the stars, and that's the
constellations, and I'm sure that's what we old guys used to think. Yeah, so it's of interest that
they would get a three ton, four ton lunder this stuff and then cut all the way up to Stonehenge.
They were highly motivated to do it, but whether it was religion, whether it was
the kind of animist religion that they would have had, I don't know. Their own religion,
based upon the world in which they lived, so that they would relate more readily to something like
the spirit of the stone, or the spirit of the sky, or the spirit of the land, rather than saying
that there's an abstract sort of god hidden away somewhere. And their blue, dollarite I think,
but it's a rock which is not uncommon. This one was found in a place where I go to house,
just in the ground, and I had it polished because I had this idea. There's a couple of us who
think that the reason for having these stone circles is because they thought that the rock
was special in some way. But I've tried all sorts about trying to communicate with it,
and I've slept up the night up there. I've sat there listening all day sometimes,
but there's no vibes, there's no sort of magic. It's just a number up.